.ds Ps P\s-2OST\s+2S\s-2CRIPT\0\s+2
.na
.TH RALBROWSE 1 Rutherford
.SH NAME
ralbrowse \- Front end for RALpage \- an Interpreter for a subset of the
.Ps
page description language
.SH SYNOPSIS
ralbrowse [ file ]
.br
psroff -t [ macros and files ... ] | ralbrowse
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ralbrowse
is a front end for the RALpage
.Ps
language interpreter.
It expects a file containing a conforming
.Ps
language document, such as that produced by
.IR psroff (1)
.PP
.I ralbrowse
will read the file (or its standard input, if the file is absent), and start up
.I ralpage
which is the interpreter proper.
.I ralpage 
will create an A4 window on the left of the screen, so it is advisable to start it from
a window on the right.
.I ralpage
runs asynchronously, so a new prompt will usually appear before a page has finished
printing, possibly even before it has started printing.
.PP
.I ralbrowse
produces a prompt in the starting window after it has read the file, and then
expects the user to type RETURN into the starting window to step through pages of the document.
A page number may be typed to cause the numbered page to be printed.
Page numbering always starts from one, regardless of what number might be printed
on the page itself.
To finish browsing, use "exit", "q" or EOF.
.SH INVOCATION
.br
$ ralbrowse file.ps
.br
Type <RETURN> to view sequentially, <number> to view a random page
.br
"exit" "quit" "q" or <EOF> to stop
.br
Reading - please wait...4 pages.
.br
page: 
.br
[1]
.br
page: 3
.br
page: q
.br
$
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR ralpage (1),
.IR psroff (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Crispin A. A. Goswell
.SH TRADEMARKS
.Ps
is a registered trademark of Adobe Systems Incorporated.
